## Abstract {.page_break_before}

<!-- 150 word limit -->

Cancer cell sensitivity or resistance is almost universally quantified through a direct or surrogate measure of cell number. However, compound responses can occur through a number of distinct phenotypic outcomes, including changes in cell growth, apoptosis, and non-apoptotic cell death. These outcomes have distinct effects on the tumor microenvironment, immune responses, and resistance mechanisms. Here, we show that quantifying cell viability alone is insufficient to distinguish between these compound responses. Using an alternative assay and computational analysis amenable to high-throughput measurement, we find that compounds with identical viability outcomes can have very different effects on cell growth and death. Moreover, compound pairs with additive cell growth and death effects can appear synergistic when only assessed by viability. Overall, these results demonstrate an approach to incorporating measurements of cell death into pharmacologic response.

## Summary Points

- Measurements of solely live cell numbers mask important differences in compound effects.
- Additive effects on growth and death rates can appear synergistic when analyzed solely via live cell number.
- Automated imaging can provide reasonable throughput to analyze cell response in terms of cell growth and death, and endpoint analysis is similarly informative.
- The efficacy of drug combinations can be predicted by the separate impact of each compound on cell growth and death rates.
