## Introduction

<!-- 2,500 - 3,500 words, excluding abstract, online Methods, references and figure legends) -->

Quantifying cellular response to therapeutic compounds is essential to understanding their mechanisms of action and assessing therapeutic efficacy [@pmid:22003129; @pmid:19451690; @pmid:22460902]. In the case of cancer treatments, and often with other diseases, drug activities are evaluated by quantifying the number of live cells after a short period of time using direct or surrogate measurements [@pmid:22886092; @pmid:24013279]. However, quantities beyond the number and viability of cells provide extremely valuable information about cellular response, such as drug resistance and immune response. Along with altering cell proliferation, promoting cell death is another important index of drug efficacy [@pmid:22959036; @pmid:22310284]. Incomplete eradication of drug susceptible malignant cells allows the survival of drug-tolerant persister cell populations, which develop resistance, and these cell populations show diverse profiles of cell death induction according to their sensitivities to drugs [@pmid:20371346; @pmid:26828195; @pmid:26891683]. Moreover, cell death can occur via a variety of mechanisms, including apoptosis and necroptosis, and selection among these outcomes can potently modulate the immunogenicity of a cancer [@pmid:28338065]. Therefore, it becomes more challenging to evaluate drug response with combination therapies due to limited understanding of these underlying cellular responses. Combination treatments are typically evaluated for their ability to enact greater effects than either compound alone [@pmid:26171228]; how this might be evaluated when quantifying multiple cellular phenotypes is unclear.

Here, we show that directly measuring rates of cell death along with cell number over time can provide valuable information for interpreting the response of cells to single and combination treatments. Through analysis taking into account the compound-induced changes in rates of cell growth and death, we propose a framework for quantifying sensitivity to compounds and combination effect. We further show how combination treatments can be suggested based on our analysis. This approach reveals extensive differences in cell response otherwise hidden by simply quantifying cell number.  Of course, trade-offs exist for the breadth versus depth of analysis that can be performed to characterize cell-compound response. We show that endpoint analysis preserves much of the distinct outcomes we observe in kinetic measurements, while allowing similarly high-throughput analysis to those of live cell number surrogates. These results demonstrate the need and an approach to more precisely quantify the nature of cell-compound response and interactions.
