## Results

### Markers of live cell number are insufficient to distinguish cell growth and death effects

![**Confounding effects of cell growth and death on drug-response measurements.**
a, Schematic of drug response assessed by calculating relative changes in live cell number after drug treatment (gray box), and cell growth and death rate that underlie the changes (blue box). Both growth and death rate were assumed to have a Hill curve relationship with respect to drug concentration.
b, Cell viability of H1299 cells treated with doxorubicin (DOX) at varying concentrations for 72 hr (N = 3).
c, Model fit to live cell measurements.
d, Model fit and confidence intervals for the predicted growth rate of cells after fitting to measurements of live cell number. 
e, Model fit and confidence intervals for the predicted death rate.
f, Model fit posterior samples of DOX's effect on growth versus its effect on cell death.
g, Model predictions of cumulative number of dead cells and cell divisions over the course of the experiment, for a constant drug effect of reducing cell viability by 75%. x-axis indicates a growth-biased versus death-biased drug effect.](./output/Figure1.svg){#fig:distinguish width="100%"}

To test whether growth and death are confounded in live cell measurements (fig. {@fig:distinguish}a), we first explored the uncertainty in a model using only these measurements. We fit typical dose-response measurements of H1299 non-small cell lung cancer cells to the chemotherapy doxorubicin (fig. {@fig:distinguish}b) to a model incorporating both cell growth and death. We assumed no cell death in the absence of drug to show the best-case scenario of assessing drug response. This model was identifiable for the live cell number (fig. {@fig:distinguish}c), and the IC~50~ and E~max~ of compound effect on cell viability were narrowly defined as 21.4 ± 1.0 nM and 26.7 ± 3.4% (90% confidence interval), respectively. In contrast, the model showed large uncertainty in inferred cellular growth or death rates (fig. {@fig:distinguish}d,e). At the maximum dose, the predicted growth rate ranged 0.33–0.71 day^-1^ and death rate 0.02–0.40 day^-1^ (90% CI). The large uncertainty in outcome was due to a strong correlation in the fit values of drug effect on the growth and death rates (fig. {@fig:distinguish}f). This shows that, given only live cell number quantitation, one is incapable of distinguishing between reductions in cellular growth rate and increases in cell death. The number of divisions and cell deaths can vary largely while similarly fitting live cell measurements. Moreover, the number of cell divisions and cumulative dead cells can differ more than two-fold while resulting in the exact same cell viability (fig. {@fig:distinguish}g).

### High-throughput measurements of cell death quantify compound response

![**High-throughput measurements of cell death enable interrogation of compound response.**
a, Representative images from live cell imaging and processing.
b, Experimental measurements of doxorubicin (DOX, top) and vinorelbine (NVB, bottom) response in H1299 cells over time. Phase indicates total cell confluence. Each line represents the mean of triplicate measurements for individual drug dose over time and shaded areas show the ranges of measurements.
c, Schematic of the cell growth-death model. The live (`L`) cells grow at the rate of division (`div`) and die at the rate of death (`deathRate`). The model considers two fractions of cells in cell death: cells dying through apoptosis (`apopfrac`) and other modes (`1 - apopfrac`). Cells in early apoptosis (`A`) proceed into late apoptosis (`DA`) by losing membrane integrity at rate `d`.
d, The model predicted `div`, `deathRate`, and `apopfrac` from the data represented in (b). Violins show posterior of model after fitting.
e, Cell division analysis of CFSE-labeled H1299 cells by flow cytometry. The distribution of cells according to CFSE fluorescence intensity on indicated days for untreated cells (left) or after indicated treatments (right) for 72 hr are shown in box plots with median, lower and upper quartiles. Median CFSE intensities of 2–4 days post CFSE labeling in left graph are marked as dashed lines on the right graph.
f, Number of generations for indicated conditions calculated by median fluorescence intensities from CFSE-based assay and predicted cell growth rates from kinetic and endpoint measurements.
g, Western blot of cleaved-caspase 3 after treating H1299 cells with indicated drug doses for 24, 48 and 72 hrs.
](./output/Figure2.svg){#fig:measure width="100%"}

To quantify pharmacologic response, we extended our experimental measurements to those of cell death. While quantifying the number of cells over time by phase, we used an Annexin V probe to measure phosphatidylserine exposure during apoptosis and a membrane-impermeable DNA dye, YOYO-3, to measure permeabilized apoptotic and dead cells (fig. {@fig:measure}a and Supplementary Video 1-9) [@pmid:20671723]. The area occupied by cells, Annexin V and YOYO-3 signal in each image were then analyzed to determine the total, apoptotic, and dead cells relative to the whole image area. We evaluated this real-time imaging method by measuring the response to doxorubicin (DOX) in H1299 cells. DOX strongly reduced the number of cells (fig. {@fig:measure}b, top), as seen before (fig. {@fig:distinguish}b). At the same time, we observed an increase in Annexin V while YOYO-3 increased minimally throughout the assay. Fitting these data to a model of cell growth and death (fig. {@fig:measure}c), we observed a strong decrease in the inferred growth rate (div), and only a modest increase in cell death rate (deathRate; fig. {@fig:measure}d, top). We next compared these measurements to those with another chemotherapy, vinorelbine (NVB), again observing a dose-dependent decrease in the number of live cells (fig. {@fig:measure}b, bottom). At the same time, we observed a large increase in both Annexin V and YOYO-3 signal. This was reflected in our subsequent analysis, inferring an increase in the death rate (fig. {@fig:measure}d, bottom). The fraction of cells dying through apoptosis (`apopfrac`) was also inferred to be lower in NVB as compared to DOX treatment (fig. {@fig:measure}d). While kinetic measurements provide a wealth of information, end-point measurement is more amenable to high-throughput experiments. We confirmed that our analysis provided qualitatively similar results using only the first and last measurements in each experiment, demonstrating that cell growth and death can both be quantified using both kinetic and endpoint measurements (fig. {@fig:S1}).

To independently verify these opposing outcomes upon DOX or NVB treatment, we used a carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE)-based proliferation assay to verify the distinct growth rate effects inferred by our analysis. We measured CFSE intensity of untreated cells every 24 hr starting from a day after cell labeling (fig. {@fig:measure}e, left). The detected intensity over time was used to estimate the number of times each cell had divided. Consistent with the inferred growth rate of our model, DOX-treated cells distributed more towards higher CFSE intensity in a dose-dependent manner, implying fewer cell divisions than with non-treated cells (fig. {@fig:measure}e, right). In contrast, the distribution of NVB-treated cells remained similar to non-treated cells. Our inferred cell growth rates and CFSE measurements were overall consistent (fig. {@fig:measure}f).

To validate the deduced cell death rates, we measured the induction of cleaved caspase-3, an apoptotic marker, after treatment with DOX or NVB (fig. {@fig:measure}g). After 24-hr treatment, cleaved caspase-3 was detected in NVB- but not DOX-treated cells. Both drugs induced the caspase-3 cleavage by 48-hr treatment. These observations were consistent with the inferred cell death rates that NVB induces faster cell death than DOX. Interestingly, the level of cleaved caspase-3 after 72-hr treatment was lower in NVB-treated cells compared to DOX-treated cells. This may be explained by the model-inferred dose-dependent decrease of `apopfrac` in NVB treatment while the cell death rates increased in fig. {@fig:measure}d, which implies the increase of non-apoptotic cell death, such as caspase-independent cell death. Alternatively, a large fraction of NVB-treated cells are dead after 72 hrs. Phosphatidylserine (to which Annexin V binds) is irreversibly externalized to the cell surface by caspase-dependent scramblases during apoptosis, in contrast, it is not exposed by caspase-independent cell death [@pmid:12920030; @pmid:26437594], and NVB may induce caspase-independent cell death as well as apoptosis. Collectively, measuring and analyzing phase, Annexin V and YOYO-3 signals can quantify both the growth and death rate effects of drugs on cells.

### Targeted compounds also display distinct phenotypic consequences

![**Comparing drug response for targeted compounds with distinct mechanisms of action.**
Model predicted cell division (a) and death rates (b) for six targeted and one chemotherapy compound. Measurements (phase, Annexin V, YOYO-3) shown in fig. {@fig:S2}. The mean value of the model posterior for each dose is plotted. c, Cell division and death rates are plotted together. See fig. {@fig:S3} for probability density of each compound’s inferred `div`, `deathRate` and `apopfrac`.
](./output/Figure3.svg){#fig:targeted width="100%"}

We next evaluated whether the growth-death model can dissect the response of cancer cells to targeted compounds as well. We treated a non-small cell lung cancer cell line PC9 with 6 different targeted drugs whose effects on cell growth and death we expected to vary according to their mechanisms of action. We also used paclitaxel, a chemotherapeutic drug that is widely known to interfere with cell cycle resulting in reduced proliferation and cell death, as a standard compound for comparing/assessing the impact of targeted drugs on cell division and death rate. The total, apoptotic and dead cell measurements from each compound treatment were diverse (fig. {@fig:S2}) and these differences were reflected in the inferred cell division and death rates (fig. {@fig:targeted} and fig. {@fig:S3}).

We were able to classify the tested compounds into 3 types: a compound that (1) both inhibits cell division and induces cell death, (2) only inhibits cell division, and (3) only induces cell death. As expected, paclitaxel fell into the first type by simultaneously exhibiting strong cell growth suppression and death. Similar to paclitaxel, the PI3Kɑ inhibitor BYL749, the pan-PIM kinase inhibitor PIM447 and the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib were grouped into the first type. In contrast, both OSI-906, a dual IGF1R/INSR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, and binimetinib, a MEK1/2 inhibitor, mainly decreased cell division rates. OSI-906 inhibited the division rate as effective as paclitaxel within the range of tested doses. LCL161 is a small molecule SMAC mimetic that antagonizes multiple inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family proteins and augments apoptosis induction. Consistent with its mechanism of action, LCL161 showed a minimal effect on cell division while strongly enhancing cell death. Taken together, the growth-death model allows us to interpret the response of cancer cells to different targeted drugs in terms of cell division and death rates, which otherwise would not be revealed from overall phenotypic changes without a panel of experiments.

### Compounds with disparate phenotypic outcomes can appear synergistic when only analyzed by viability

![**Additive interactions can appear synergistic when only assessed by viability.**
a & f, Heatmap of percent confluence for combinations of LCL161 (a) or PIM447 (f) with OSI-906.
b & g, Heatmap of deviation from Bliss additivity for measurements in a & f.
c & h, Heatmap of deviation from additive model incorporating both growth and death processes.
d & i, Heatmap of percent image area positive for Annexin V signal.
e & j, Fit growth rate IC~50~ and death rate EC~50~ for each drug. Fits come from the additive interaction model incorporating both processes.
The experimental measurements are shown in fig. {@fig:S4}.
](./output/Figure4.svg){#fig:last width="100%"}

Based on the changes in rate parameters by targeted drugs in fig. {@fig:targeted}, we wondered how drugs with non-overlapping phenotypic effects might influence cell behavior when combined. We selected one compound from each of the three groups identified from fig. {@fig:targeted}; PIM447 affected both cell division and death rates, OSI-906 affected only cell division, and LCL161 affected only cell death. Combination treatment between OSI-906 and LCL161 or PIM447 was quantified. Each compound's effect closely matched those we expected from the single agent treatments (fig. {@fig:targeted}, fig. {@fig:last}a & f, and fig. {@fig:S4}a & b).

Interestingly, the nature of each drug's interaction was dependent upon whether we took cell death into account. A Bliss additivity model using just cell confluence indicated that both combinations led to a synergistic interaction (fig. {@fig:last}b & g). However, we also used our combination treatment data to fit a model in which both growth and death rates respond based on a Hill curve dose-response relationship (fig. {@fig:S4}a & b). Assuming Bliss additivity for the growth rate, and an additive interaction for the death rate, fit our measurements much more closely (fig. {@fig:last}c & h). Investigating the source of this discrepancy, we noted that OSI-906 in particular has a distinct IC~50~ for growth and EC~50~ for death (fig. {@fig:S4}e & j), and that the concentration range between these two values is where synergy was observed when only using confluence (fig. {@fig:S4}b & g). Therefore, we conclude that not only are measures of cell death an important component of pharmacologic response, but that ignoring cell death can lead to spurious conclusions of drug synergy.
