## Discussion

More than half of preclinical agents entering clinical trials fail to be approved due to lack of efficacy [@doi:10.1038/nrd3439; @pmid:23903212], and the success rate for clinical approval of oncology drugs remains low as 13% [@doi:10.1038/clpt.2013.117]. These statistics reveal the limitation in current preclinical experimental models and analysis in predicting clinical outcomes. Recently, new strategies of evaluating drug response, such as patient-derived xenografts and organoids, have been introduced to more closely match patient's tumors to effective compounds [@pmid:26479923; @pmid:27135972; @pmid:30797775]. Two major phenotypic changes we can observe as cellular responses to drugs are cell growth and death. Each response differs according to the administered drug and contributes to the overall effect. In this paper, we demonstrate that cell viability measurements alone cannot distinguish these phenotypic outcomes (fig. {@fig:distinguish}). These responses can strongly influence clinical outcome [@pmid:28338065]. Thus, we propose a high-throughput assay that can be paired with analysis to quantify both the growth and death effects of drug response for better estimation of drug efficacy. Applying this analysis, we identify that compounds can have distinct outcomes by specifically driving growth, death, or mixed effects (fig. {@fig:targeted}). Cell death can also take distinct forms, which can easily be quantified as relatively more or less apoptotic (fig. {@fig:measure}). Further, additive drug interactions in terms of cell growth or death can appear synergistic when only assessed through cell viability (fig. {@fig:last}). Overall, these results show that cytotoxic drug response should be assessed by the distinct phenotypes of cell growth and death, then demonstrate an approach to do so.

Separating these phenotypic outcomes provides future opportunities for cancer treatment. A more detailed view of phenotypic drug response should enable treatment optimization both in a population- and patient-specific manner [@pmid:29245013]. For maximally-effective cancer treatment, single or combination treatments should likely modulate both phenotypes. Purely cytostatic therapy leaves drug persister cells able to undergo genetic or epigenetic changes giving rise to resistance [@pmid:26828195]. On the other hand, cell death may not overcome the replenishment of tumor cells at toxicity-limiting doses. Among the targeted therapies we evaluated, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib exhibited strong inhibition on cell division while modest induction on cell death. Consistent with our result, recent studies on mechanism of erlotinib resistance reported that drug-tolerant colonies maintain throughout drug exposure in quiescent state and expand over long period of time acquiring resistance [@pmid:20371346; @pmid:26891683]. A combination of erlotinib with a cell death-inducing agent may therefore prevent the survival of drug-tolerant subpopulation cells.

Our analysis results in drug combination also provided a plausible cause for frequent failure of preclinical regimens in clinical trials. The insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) signaling pathway is a well-characterized pathway involved in cancer cell survival and promoting drug resistance [@pmid:21907495]. IGF-1R inhibitors have been validated for their efficacy in various cancer types as mono- and combined therapies in preclinical studies [@pmid:26497996; @pmid:27196766; @pmid:26756219]. Despite promising preclinical evidence, only limited responses were observed in clinical trials [@pmid:28772281; @pmid:29454514; @pmid:27686971; @pmid:25395283]. From our drug combination experiments with the IGF-1R inhibitor OSI-906, we discovered that the analysis by cell viability alone found a strong synergistic interaction, while our analysis accounting cell growth and death identified an additive response. Thus, synergy observed in preclinical assays may have been due to the nature of the assay moreso than molecular synergy.

This more detailed analysis of phenotypic response can also help to optimize the microenvironment and host immune response to cancer. For example, host response is potently influenced by the routes of cell death [@doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.aaw2004; @doi:10.1172/JCI76375]. These methods can be applied not only *in vitro* but in more complex, translationally-relevant models such as organoids and *in vivo* [@doi:10.1038/s42003-019-0305-x]. By doing so, treatments could be tailored to not just maximally reduce cell viability, but optimize cytotoxicity and cell death programs to mount a host response [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.01.014].

The approach here will benefit from improvements in the single-cell resolution of drug response and more exactly distinguishing cell death programs. Cell-to-cell variability impacts both drug response and the development of resistance [@doi:10.1016/j.coisb.2019.09.002] and single-cell technologies have enabled in-depth molecular analyses of this heterogeneity [@pmid:27124452; @doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1576-0]. Within a tumor population, drug treatment can dynamically shift the balance of variability present, and so dynamic information will likely be critical [@pmid:20371346; @pmid:21854987]. Automated cell tracking would enable drug response quantification, with single-cell resolution, while preserving the lineage relationship of cells [@doi:10.1101/373258; @doi:10.1101/797225]. Finally, while we distinguish relatively more or less apoptotic cell death here, various cell death programs exist [@doi:10.1038/s41418-017-0012-4]. Improved methods to visualize distinct forms of cell death in populations of cells will allow distinct forms of cell death to be separately quantified [@pmid:28264914].
