## Methods

All analysis was implemented in Python, and can be found at https://github.com/meyer-lab/ps-growth-model, release 1.0 (doi: 00.0000/arc0000000).

### Compounds and Cell culture

Doxorubicine, OSI-906, BYL719, binimetinib, and paclitaxel were purchased from LC Laboratories (Woburn, MA). PIM447 and LCL161 were obtained from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX). Vinorelbine was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Human lung carcinoma PC9 cells were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, and H1299 cells were provided from ATCC (Manassas, VA). All cell lines were grown in RMPI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin, at 37℃ and 5% CO~2~.

### End-point cell viability assay

Cells were seeded overnight at a density of 1.5 × 10^3^ cells/well in 96-well plates, and then treated with the indicated drugs. After 72 hrs, CellTiter Glo reagent (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to each well and luminescence was detected according to the manufacturer's instructions.

### Time-lapse microscopy

Cells were seeded at 1.5 × 10^3^ cells per well in 96-well plates and cultured overnight. The next day, each indicated treatment was added, along with IncuCyte Annexin V Green Reagent (Essen BioScience, Ann Arbor, MI) and 300 nM YOYO-3 in media containing 1.25 mM CaCl~2~. Cells were then cultured and imaged within the IncuCyte Zoom or S3 (Essen BioScience) every three hours. Four fields of view were taken per well. Fluorescence images were manually thresholded and the fraction of image area with Annexin V and/or YOYO-3 signal was quantified using IncuCyte Zoom or S3 software (Essen BioScience). Finally, the fraction of area occupied by cells was analyzed by brightfield analysis.

### Growth model structure

Cell behavior was modeled using a series of kinetic equations incorporating cell growth and death. We represent the overall state of a population of cells as $v = \[L, E, D_a, D_n \]$, respectively indicating the number of live cells, cells within early apoptosis, dead cells via apoptosis, and dead cells via a non-apoptotic process. Using such notation, the time derivative was defined as:

$$\dot{v} = \[(R_g - R_d)L, R_d \cdot f \cdot L - E, \tau \cdot E, R_d (1-f) L \]$$

where $R_g$ (or `div`) is the rate of cell division, $R_d$ (or `deathRate`) is the rate of cell death, $f$ (or `apopFrac`) is the fraction of dying cells which go through apoptosis, and $\tau$ (or `d`) determines the rate of conversion from early to late apoptosis.

If $\gamma = R_g - R_d$, $c = (R_d \cdot f)/(g+d)$, and $m = R_d (1-f)$, integrating these equations provides the solution:

$$v(t) = \[ e^{\gamma t}, c(L-e^{mt}), mc(L-1)/\gamma + c(e^{mt}-1), m(L-1)/\gamma \]$$

### Growth model inferrence

Predicted cell numbers were fit to experimental measurements using Markov chain Monte Carlo [@doi:10.7717/peerj-cs.55]. The percent area positive for cell confluence, PS stain, or DNA stain was quantified and assumed to be proportional to the number of cells positive for each marker. Apoptotic cells were assumed to be positive for PS signal then positive for both signals after dying. Non-apoptotic cells were assumed to just be positive for YOYO-3 signal after dying. Each rate parameter was fit to the corresponding measurements within a single drug condition over time. An entire experiment, corresponding to a set of different compounds and concentrations, was fit simultaneously, allowing for a background offset and conversion factor of each quantity to be fit across the experiment.

`div`, `deathRate`, and `d` were set to have log-normal prior distributions of mean 0.02, 0.01, and 0.001, with standard deviation 1.0, 1.0, and 0.5, respectively. By inspecting a calibration experiment and manually counting the cells within a field, we measured the conversion between number of cells and area of signal for the confluence, Annexin V, and YOYO-3 images. In addition, we quantified the ratio of positive area for each pair of signals when a single cell was positive for both. Each of these were set as log-normal prior distributions on the conversion values between number of cells and positive area. Finally, we observed appreciable background in the Annexin V and YOYO-3 signal, leading to signal in the absence of cells. Therefore, we set log-normal priors for the background levels with mean 0.1% of area and standard deviation of 0.1. Each data point was assumed to have independent, normally-distributed error around the model prediction.

Sampling convergence was verified by checking that two independent runs generated insignificant differences and checking for ergodicity through the Geweke criterion, comparing the first and second half of each run. Sampling failures were solved by increasing the number of tuning samples.

### Hill curve identifiability model

TODO: Need to add.

### CFSE-based cell proliferation analysis

Cell division was measured using carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) dilution analysis. Cells were labeled with 5 μM CFSE (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The stained cells were seeded overnight in 60 mm dishes at a density of 2 × 10^5^ cells per dish, and then treated with indicated drugs next day. For 72 hrs at 24 hr intervals, cells were collected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde prior to acquisition on a BD LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). CFSE signal intensity of 1 × 10^4^ cells was recorded and analyzed to measure cell divisions. Cells were labeled the same day to determine initial labeling.

### Western blot analysis

Cells were seeded at a density of 2 × 10^5^ cells per 60 mm dish 24 hours prior to drug treatment then treated with the indicated conditions for 24, 48, and 72 hrs. After incubation, cells were lysed in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton-X 100, 0.1% Na deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, and 140 mM NaCl, freshly supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Boston Bio Products, Ashland, MA). Protein concentration was measured by a bicinchoninic acid assay. 10 μg of protein from each cell lysate was subjected to SDS-PAGE, and then transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. Each membrane was incubated overnight with antibody against cleaved caspase 3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, #9664) or 1.5 hours with HRP conjugated β-actin antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, #12262). β-actin was used as a loading control for western blot analysis.
