## Markers of live cell number are insufficient to distinguish cell growth and death effects


With the notion that cell growth and death are confounded in live cell measurements, we wished to characterize what relationship exists between the uncertainty of each when further information is not available ([@fig:Motivate]A). To do so, we fit a model incorporating both ([@fig:Motivate]B) to typical measurements of H1299 dose-response to a chemotherapy doxorubicin ([@fig:Motivate]C). We further assumed no cell death in the absence of drug, to show the best-case scinario of assessing drug response. This model was able to confidently fit metrics of dose response when restricted to the live cell number relationship ([@fig:Motivate]D). In contrast, the model showed large uncertainty when it came to the cellular growth or death rates ([@fig:Motivate]E-F). This was due to the fit values of drug effect on the growth and death rate being strongly correlated ([@fig:Motivate]E). That is, one is not able to distinguish a strong reduction in cellular growth rate from a large increase in cell death. Importantly, while both scinarios are indistinguishable from the available data, they lead to very different outcomes. For example, each extreme has more than a two-fold difference in the number of cell divisions during the course of the experiment, and a complete difference in the number of dead cells generated ([@fig:Motivate]I). Distinguishing these outcomes can therefore unmask meaningful differences in cell drug response.


TODO: Take out the PCA analysis here. It doesn't really show much.

![**Measures of cell death are critical to quantifying cell response.** A) Schematic of our growth model incorporating cell death. In addition to undergoing exponential growth cells can die at some constant rate. B) Schematic of how drug response was handled. Both growth and death rate were assumed to have a sigmoidal relationship with respect to log(drug concentration). C) Celltiter Glo measurements of HCC1299 cells treated with doxorubicin at varying concentrations (N = 3). D) Model fit to live cell measurements. E) Model fit and confidence intervals for the predicted growth rate of cells after fitting to measurements of live cell number. F) Model fit and confidence intervals for the predicted death rate. G) Model fit posterior samples of doxorubicin's effect on growth versus its effect on cell death. H) Principal components analysis of the model posterior samples. I) Model predictions and confidence intervals for the rate of cell turnover and cumulative number of dead cells over the course of the experiment.](./Figures/Figure1.svg){#fig:Motivate}
